Good afternoon everyone.  Today I stand before you for the sixth and final time.  I admit that it is a bittersweet occasion.  It is a time to celebrate accomplishments, but it is also a reminder that time is running out to do more.  I love this city!  I love the people who live here, and that love has been the driving force behind every decision I’ve made. 
I want to talk about my Houston.  I talk about Houston a lot.  I’ve had an unprecedented amount of media attention during my terms as Mayor, and it’s given me an unparalleled opportunity to share my city with the world.  Note that:  my Houston, my city.  I was born and have spent all my adult life here, so it’s the city with which I am most familiar, but it’s mine for more than that. Any Mayor is the public face and voice of her city, performing ceremonial duties, providing routine information and delivering crisis communications.  It’s my city for more than that.  In a strong Mayor city I not only lead the city, but I also run the city, but it’s my city in more ways that, too.
Each of us has a way of knowing Houston as “mine”.  And that may be the best thing about my city; it’s your city, and her city, and his city, and their city.  It has nothing to do with birthplace, isn’t about how long one has lived here, is not about the jobs we hold, or what language we speak.  As we become hers, we each know Houston as ours. And we treat her that way. 
I woke up one morning and discovered I lived in a thriving, exciting, hardworking global village, surrounded by immigrants and refugees and transplants and visitors and natives. And we all belong.
That belonging is vital.  It is an amazing phenomenon.  The more we each claim our Houston, the more there is of her to share; new people, new places, new opportunities. Some cities may be the melting pot, where differences melt away.  Some cities may be the tossed salad, where everything keeps its separateness.  We’re the fusion of Korean braised pork tacos with a side of saag paneer and a glass of St. Arnolds.
But something else happens when Houston belongs to each of us.  We expect each other to care, to give back.  We join together to house Katrina evacuees, share power after Ike, and show up on a Saturday morning to plant trees.  We do the hard work and think long term. We expect each other to put Houston first. Every day I see that happen.
Throughout my time as mayor – actually, during my nearly 18 years in government – I’ve worked hard to put Houston first, as has every member of my team.  The payoff is a Houston that is better prepared for the future, that is better off today than we were five years ago.  This is why I am able to proclaim the state of our city remains strong.  Low oil prices have slowed our growth, but our economy is broader and deeper than ever before. There are challenges: rapid population growth, aging infrastructure, punishing pension obligations. What major city does not have challenges? There are none better prepared to face them. 
Among those who have led our great city before me, there have been reform mayors, infrastructure mayors, public safety mayors, business mayors – I like to think I’ve done some of all of that.  But for today, I’ll just say I always put Houston first – and that political capital is the one asset that should be spent freely.
There has been a lot to celebrate over the last five years, but one of the most gratifying things has been getting to watch the rest of the world take notice and begin to view our Houston through a different lens.  The national headlines continue to tell the story of our success.
Of course, none of what has been accomplished would have been possible without the support of my senior staff, the city workforce, city council, our partners in other governmental agencies and the residents of Houston.  Everyone has been thanking me today.  Thank you for putting Houston first.
So, just what have we been doing for the last five years, three months and 16 days to put Houston first?
A Working Houston
We’ve put people to work.  It started with the Hire Houston First program to promote economic opportunity for Houston businesses and support job creation by granting preference to local companies as long as their pricing is competitive.  Since the program began, more than 1400 companies have registered to participate. 
Likewise, we are helping minority and women-owned firms compete and grow.  During my administration more than $1.2 billion worth of City contracts have gone to these underutilized companies. That’s more than one-fourth of all the work awarded in the program’s 30 year history!
Our Wage Theft Ordinance helps ensure that a dollar is paid for every dollar that is earned.  And our Payday Lending Ordinance cracks down on predatory lenders.
We removed the obstacles to housing that often prevent the homeless from being able to hold down gainful employment.  In fact, Houston is leading the nation in reducing homelessness.  Our community-driven, comprehensive approach, known as The Way Home, has cut our homeless population in half. We have also housed more than 3,500 homeless veterans.  We are on track to end chronic homeless by the end of my term in office.
I privatized our convention facilities into the Houston First Corporation and its leading the transformation of the convention district amid a burst of new commercial and residential construction. Last year at this time, we broke ground on our second convention center hotel.  Today, the 1,000-room Marriott Marquis is close to topping out.  Organized labor was at the table and it, like the Hilton Americas, will be a union hotel.
At our airports, we have invested more than a billion dollars in improvements.  Eight new carriers have joined us and three more intend to start operations here this year.  Last month, international flights returned to Hobby – the first since 1969 – with the new international terminal on schedule for this fall.
Before the end of the year, we will see relocation of the Lone Star Flight Museum to Ellington Airport and a decision on whether Ellington will be home to a commercial spaceport.
The numbers are proof that we are getting the job done.  From January 2010 to last December, the Houston region created just under half a million jobs and has led the nation in housing permits five years in a row.  Whether it’s a new high rise in Uptown or downtown, expansion in our medical center or new terminals at the airport, these projects mean food on the table and better futures for thousands of Houston families!
A Safer Houston
The city’s crime rate is the lowest in decades. The backlog of untested rape kits is no more, our sobering center is a model for the nation, hundreds of rundown properties owned by slumlords have been bulldozed, we’ve cracked down on illegal game room operations and we have outlawed the use of synthetic marijuana - which was out of control - especially in our downtown parks and plazas.  We restored trust in our crime lab.
A unique cooperative arrangement has financed a new human trafficking unit at HPD.  In 2013, there were 28 human trafficking related charges filed.  Last year, that number jumped to 101. Human trafficking tips have increased more than 1000 percent since 2013. 
HPD and HFD are the most diverse they’ve ever been.  HFDs latest class of recruits was nearly 60 percent women and minorities.  HFD also celebrated the first promotion of a woman, Cynthia Vargas, to the position of Executive Assistant Fire Chief in the department’s history.  Both departments have taken tragic losses and used their lessons to keep our first responders safer. 
At BARC Animal Shelter and Adoptions, euthanasia is down, the live release rate is at an all- time high of 80% and we are using creative public/private partnerships to increase the city’s spay-neuter rate and decrease the number of stray animals roaming our streets.
Challenging and changing the status quo of decades is always difficult, but it is necessary when putting Houston first.  We see the impact when a rape victim’s assailant is finally charged, when our city is safer than it was five years, when our neighborhoods are free of rundown properties that harbor crime and drugs, when a young immigrant is saved from a life of slavery, when chances are less that a child will be bitten by a stray dog and when the city workforce looks like the rest of Houston! 
A Greener Houston
This summer, we will celebrate completion of the restoration of Buffalo Bayou Park.  The vision was for the bayou to become our Central Park.  There are more bridges, new lighting, improved trails, a restaurant, more trees and a performance area.  I will never be able to adequately express my gratitude to Rich and Nancy Kinder for this wonderful gift they have given Houston.  It is truly beautiful!
In addition to the work along Buffalo Bayou, the Centennial Gardens have been completed at Hermann Park, Memorial Park has been entirely reimagined, Emancipation Park is being restored, Moody Park Community Center has been rebuilt, hike and bike trails have been added along our bayous and utility easements and the largest skate park in North America is now open in north Houston. 
And, be forewarned, we will not stand for Houston’s trees, whether parks or along public rights-of-way, being cut down. 
Visit any of these places and you’ll see youngsters of all ages peddling, running, skateboarding, fishing, working out or just lounging in the grass.  You’ll even see dogs enjoying freedom from the leash at our new dog parks.  Yet to come is a first-rate botanic garden and a restored Gus Wortham Golf Course.  We’ll reap the benefits of the investment in our greener Houston for decades to come. 
A More Sustainable Houston
A greener Houston also means a more sustainable Houston.  The City has launched many programs that reduce costs, increase efficiencies and improve the environment.  There has been a 32 percent decrease in greenhouse gas emissions since 2007 and I have committed to 42 percent reduction before leaving office, which will be helped by our partnership with CenterPoint to convert 165,000 street lights to LED technology, the largest conversion program in the nation.
We are meeting present and future transportation and environmental challenges by expanding METRO’s light rail to four routes and a total of 39 miles.  The reimagined bus system is a game changer.  And the first Bus Rapid Transit Line will come to Uptown.
The last single-stream, green recycling bin was delivered last month, fulfilling my promise to complete expansion of the program to all customers served by City collection trucks. And we are looking at innovative ways to further increase waste diversion with our One Bin for All proposal.
These investments in Houston first are keeping trash out of our landfills, improving the air for children with asthma and expanding transportation options for the future.
A Rebuilt Houston
Putting Houston first means fixing our streets.  We have implemented a plan to do that, but reversing years of deferred maintenance takes time, so Houston drivers will need patience.  We are spending more than ever to improve our streets and drainage!
Since our Rebuild Houston pay-as-you-go program began, more than $655 million of your dollars have already been spent or earmarked.  Almost 100 projects have been completed, 515 miles of street have been rebuilt or paved, 697 miles of ditches have been graded and 188 miles of storm sewer line have been cleaned!  There’s more to come.  In 2015, more than 220 projects will begin construction or advance closer to completion. 
A past, present and future Houston
Whether it’s updating our cultural plan, embarking on the city’s first-ever general plan or winning approval of real protections for our historic structures, planning for the future while making sure we don’t forget our past is also part of a Houston first approach.  We celebrated restoration of the beautiful Julia Ideson Library, rescued the remains of Bethel Church in the 4th Ward after years of neglect, and are restoring the Deluxe Theater.  Work in the 4th Ward will rehabilitate sewer lines while restoring the neighborhood’s historic brick streets.
A Healthier Houston
Putting Houston first means a healthier Houston.  We have improved the health of the City workforce, reduced taxpayers costs for city employee health care benefits, brought fresh vegetables to food deserts, eliminated the dangers of second hand smoke in city greenspaces and made our city more accessible to people who ride bikes.
In 2014, the League of American Bicyclists honored the City with its first Bicycle Friendly Community designation.  Ridership on our extremely popular bike share program, Houston B-Cycle, continues to increase.  We’ve joined a major bike safety campaign, known as Goal Zero, to educate motorists and cyclists about sharing the road. We passed a new Safe Passing ordinance to increase safety for those who travel on two wheels instead of four.  We’ve built the City’s first two-way cycle track in Downtown to ultimately connect Columbia Tap bike trail to Discovery Green to Buffalo Bayou.   By the time I leave office, we will have finished a comprehensive bike plan to provide a roadmap for expanding our network of bike lanes and trails.
And, through our Cigna Sunday Streets program, we are closing our streets and encouraging Houstonians to get outside for physical activity, socialize with neighbors and enjoy and patronize our diverse small businesses.
A more efficient, fiscally-responsible Houston
Putting Houston first meant hard choices that first year in office when we had to lay off 776 City employees to balance the budget.  But we are leaner and more efficient.
A new emphasis on performance improvement and data-driven management has generated more than $25 million in savings and revenue.  Our procure-to-pay initiative has achieved discounts for early payment of invoices, better prices for wireless services and the sale of vehicles and equipment we no longer need. Overall, we’ve negotiated savings in excess of $75 million. 
We’ve put in place new financial policies that require strengthened financial reserves, greater emphasis on maintenance of physical assets, increased long-term forecasting and planning, improved internal controls, and more transparency for taxpayers and elected officials. 
Finally, there’s the agreement reached last month with the Houston fire pension system.  While I have never said this agreement represents pension reform, its passage would mark the first time the fire pension has recognized that pension costs threaten our ability to provide other crucial services to our taxpayers.  It is a first step towards constructive relationships between the system and future Mayors.  It brings firefighter contributions more in line with the contributions of firefighters in other municipalities in Texas.  It provides the City with budget certainty for the next three years and it does this without kicking the can down the road!
A Houston Where Everyone Has the Same Rights
Finally, in my Houston, and in yours, we value equal rights for all.  Last spring, the Houston Equal Rights Ordinance became law.  Many of you here today helped with this effort and I remain thankful for that help.  Unfortunately, we haven’t been able to enact that law because of ongoing court challenges.  However, I am confident of victory and, as I said when standing before you a year ago, we don’t care where you come from, the color of your skin, your age, gender, what physical limitations you may have or who you choose to love.  We’ll put Houston first.
The Future
In a few short months, I will no longer have the best job I’ve ever had.  I couldn’t achieve every goal, or solve every problem. And, in fact, cities are never finished, there is always a new challenge.  But whether it’s our infrastructure, public safety, quality of life, economy or finances, there’s not a single problem that has come before me that isn’t better now than it was five years ago because we worked on it.
With this in mind, I’ve been thinking a lot about what I want from the person who will replace me. 
Being mayor requires more than rhetoric about hiring more police officers, filling more potholes or magically eliminating pension debt.  A mayor has to know how to pay for it and how to make it happen. It’s easy to point out problems.  The hard part is finding the solutions.  How will candidates put Houston first?   
I want a mayor who will fight to keep Houston first as a national and world leader – a mayor who knows we are an international city and works to continue international business development.
I want a mayor who recognizes the importance of providing opportunity in poor and minority neighborhoods. 
I want a mayor who tells the truth, even when few want to hear it, and who tackles the hard problems head on.  I want a mayor who will put Houston first and loves this city as much as I do. 
Of course, I’ll work as hard as I can on the issues before me until the very last day of my administration, and then continue after that working with you to put Houston first.
Thank you.