
Exactly 131 days ago we set out on a path of our own accord. We did not choose the easy path – a path of overlooked problems and ignored crises.
Rather, we chose a path made difficult by multi-generational challenges: The first being a crime epidemic that, with each passing day, spreads further and grows more violent; the second being an inherited budget that spends $50 million dollars more each year than it takes in; and the third being the exponential rise in the level of poverty in our city over the last 25 years. . . with 1/3 of children in Indianapolis today born into poverty...and most never escaping it.
131 days ago, with a clear eye, we chose to see it all, we chose to confront the challenges of our City as we had inherited them.
And we did so...as One City.
In the remarks I offered on the day of my swearing-in, I said that: “if we are to address all of this, it will require all of us.... This city will rise to every crisis only if every citizen will help lift it.”
For 131 days, this City has begun to rise because the people of this City have lifted it.
Because of you, I am proud to report...that the State of our City is strong.
From the very first day, some of the most gifted people in Indianapolis stepped away from more lucrative private lives to join this Administration. They represent the most diverse administration in the history of our City. It is indeed a leadership team that represents the best of Indianapolis because it looks like Indianapolis.
Because of our diversity, the State of our City is strong.
Every single morning, our city’s police officers and firefighters wake up and put on their uniforms. When they do so, they ask themselves one question: “am I willing to put my life on the line yet another day?”
And, every day, every one of them says “yes.” It is a very simple, but incredibly remarkable, thing – literally thousands of men and women willing to offer everything they have every single day. For that, we owe them our gratitude.
Because of them, the State of our City is strong. 
Over the course of the past four years, controversy has surrounded a handful of projects in Indianapolis. As a result of these disagreements, we asked people to come together and discuss a new way of resolving issues and moving our City forward.
This approach brought to a conclusion contentious litigation surrounding the BlueIndy initiative and ended the proposed Advanced Recycling Center. In so doing, this approach has brought to life new, sustainable transportation options. At the same time, a space has been created for an authentic community dialogue that will foster environmentally-sound changes in Indianapolis.
I want to thank all of those who sat down at a community table. Because of them, the State of our City is strong. 
A few weeks ago, I reported that – after weeks of effort – our Carrier Task Force recouped over $1.2 million dollars from Carrier – an amount equal to the incentives that Carrier received from the taxpayers of our City.
In the coming days, I will ask the City-County Council to designate this money to the Carrier Task Force for job placement, job training, education, and other assistance to those adversely affected by Carrier’s decision to abandon Indianapolis and ship 1400 jobs to Mexico.
The workers at Carrier know that, whatever may lie ahead, I stand, shoulder to shoulder, with them every step of the way.
Because of them, because of their resiliency, the State of our City is strong. 
Last week, I was proud to stand alongside the CEO of Salesforce, as Scott McCorkle announced his company’s commitment to bring 800 new, high-paying jobs to Indianapolis.
That announcement is a testimony to the strength of our local economy, to the talent of our workforce, to a tech sector that is making Indianapolis a tech magnet, and to the opportunity that young people will find here as a result.
But it also reflects a statement that I want the rest of our community, our state, and the nation to understand: Indianapolis. Welcomes. All. 
Last month, with bipartisan support, the City-County Council passed a series of ethics reforms that will more aggressively regulate lobbyist influence, provide tools for tougher enforcement, and increase transparency and accessibility for the people of our City.
Addressing the corrosive impact of those who may view government as an opportunity to cash in on cheap “friendships”, the City-County Council acted with honor, integrity, and intellect.
Because of them, the State of our City is strong. 
Finally, in the midst of a four year rising tide of violent crime, we made several fundamental changes in our City’s approach to public safety.
First, with overwhelming bipartisan support, a public safety reform ordinance was passed.
As a result, one of the City’s bureaucracies was eliminated, the Chiefs of police and fire now report directly to the Mayor, and a cutting-edge Office of Public Health and Safety will be created.
Over the course of the next four years, these reforms will save the City money, expand accountability and transparency, and bring a modern, holistic approach to public safety – one that focuses on the root causes of crime...such as poverty and mental health...and one that prioritizes an investment in our young people before they enter the criminal justice system altogether.
This was possible because a bipartisan group of City-County Councillors – led by Council President Maggie Lewis, Leader Mike McQuillen, Chairperson Leroy Robinson, and Councillor Marilyn Pfisterer – came together to promote sound policy.
Second, consistent with commitments I have previously made, in 131 days we have completed a full inventory of abandoned homes in Indianapolis, we have created a resident friendly online-mapping tool that identifies abandoned properties, and most importantly, we have torn down more unsafe and abandoned homes in those 131 days than had been razed in the previous two years.
Third, for more than three decades, Indianapolis has labored under a moratorium on new streetlights. Earlier today, I signed Executive Order No. 3, which – without equivocation and with the full force of law – ends the moratorium.
In that vein, I’m also pleased to announce that within the next thirty days we will begin installation of 100 new streetlights – the first set of new streetlights that Indianapolis has seen in over thirty years.
Fourth, last year, I made a commitment to the people of Indianapolis. I said that we would endeavor to secure over 1000 summer jobs for young people this summer.
With the help of all of our community partners, I am pleased to report that we are well on our way to doing just that.
Over the course of the next nine weeks as many as 1000 young people will receive the skills, the paycheck, and the simple hope that come with a summer job.
In addition, today, I am also pleased to announce that – with our summer jobs program – Indianapolis has been selected by the White House as a Summer Opportunity Hub, details of which we will be outlining in the coming days.
Finally, and perhaps most significantly, today I am proud to report that last week, for the first time in over a decade, over 60 police officers spread out over the streets of some of our neighborhoods and began walking and talking to residents, merchants, and retail establishments as beat-based, community policing returned to the streets of Indianapolis.
And if its results are as successful as I believe they will be, it is here to stay. 
What we have done in these first 131 days is rooted in a new model of governing. What we have done together has not been “party driven,” but “coalition driven.” We have focused our efforts around the particular issues and challenges we face, rather than the parties we belong to.
And we must keep moving forward in that same fashion. Indianapolis has shown government at its best: government that is driven by those it serves, government that gets the hard things done, government that does more with less.
In short, government driven by leaders that care as much, if not more, about the community they serve than the political party they belong to.
Leaders that understand that our eyes must remain on the horizon – as we do not have the luxury of looking backward.
Indeed, at the very juncture of the three challenges I have previously discussed lies a path that is difficult.
A decade ago, the City and County faced a jail-overcrowding crisis. At the time, Mayor Peterson, Sheriff Anderson, and our Courts came together to address the issue head on in the short term. Over the past ten years, the momentum created by that period of consensus was lost, as contentious debates singularly focused on a new building took hold, and any discussion of holistic reform was pushed to the wayside.
In 2013, with the passage of House Enrolled Act 1006, our State made clear its intent to push a significant number of criminals out of the Indiana Department of Corrections and into local jails. And those changes are now in full effect – as every day our local jail accumulates more criminals that, in the past, would have gone to state prison.
On April 26th, Sheriff John Layton declared a jail emergency. And, as of yesterday morning, our entire criminal justice system had capacity for only 49 additional inmates. Yet again, we confront a jail over-crowding crisis.
I thank the Criminal Justice Planning Council for their efforts to address this emergency in the short term.
But, with a $50 million structural deficit driven in large part by an inefficient and ineffective criminal justice system, we cannot let this crisis pass with just another band-aid fix.
We cannot pass this problem to another generation, and we cannot afford to allow yet another crisis five, or ten, or fifteen years from now.
We must confront this crisis now and we must make it the last.
I know that some believe that a new jail is the answer. And we need a new jail – our current facilities are out-of-date, inefficient, and unsafe. But while a new jail may be necessary, it is certainly not sufficient.
Not when 30% of inmates suffer from some form of mental illness. Not when 85% of inmates suffer from substance abuse or addiction.
Let me be as clear as I can be: our criminal justice system is broken – and merely adding more space to house more people isn’t the answer. That has been tried, and it did not work. A new building will not solve our crime problems.
The time has come for holistic, data-driven, and far-reaching reform in our criminal justice process.
The time has come for us to put an emphasis on the identification of non- violent inmates suffering from serious mental illnesses and to have them receive treatment from healthcare professionals rather than keeping them in jail.
The time has come for us to expand diversion and addiction treatment for non-violent drug offenders rather than keeping them in jail.
The time has come for us to more efficiently use community corrections and modern technology for non-violent, low level offenders to be safely monitored rather than keeping them in jail.
This will require hard decisions. It will require unprecedented cooperation. And it will require government to change, to grow smaller, to work smarter, and to do more with less.
This morning I signed Executive Order No. 4, creating the City of Indianapolis Criminal Justice Reform Task Force. The task force will be comprised of key stakeholders who will conduct a comprehensive review and investigation of our criminal justice system and make a final, complete set of recommendations to the Criminal Justice Planning Council for adoption before the end of this calendar year.
These recommendations will include a new jail, but unlike plans of the past, they will not be limited to that. They will look at, and create a comprehensive plan of reform for, our entire criminal justice system – from prevention, mental health, and drug addiction to arrest, pre-trial detention, community corrections and sentencing.
Fellow citizens: as a former federal prosecutor, I am committing this Administration to systemic criminal justice reform in Indianapolis.
It starts today. And that is not all.
The foundation for our City’s long-term success is a robust system of schools that foster growth, curiosity and innovation. Without a well-funded early childhood education apparatus, many of our students begin kindergarten and 1st grade already behind, laying the groundwork for a life without. A life without hope. A life without dreams. A life without the means to legally provide for their family and, in all too many situations, a life that enters the “school-to-prison pipeline.”
During the recent application cycle for the Indianapolis Preschool Scholarship Program, more than 4000 parents sought support for their 3 or 4-year old. Unfortunately, we can only fund so many of these high-quality preschool seats. Which is why tonight, I am announcing that, during the next legislative session, one of our fundamental priorities will be to seek funding from our State to make quality pre-K education available to every child in Indianapolis that wants it.
And that works begins NOW.
Over the next six months, we will hone our argument, we will build our movement, and in January of 2017...we will take it to the steps of the Statehouse.
Great schools are a part of the fabric of great neighborhoods.
And it’s not enough to have only one great neighborhood in a city—we need to provide every single resident of Indianapolis with close-to-home opportunities to take pleasure in public life.
And it’s not enough to have just one great place in a neighborhood—you need a number of them to create a truly great city.
Research suggests that number is 10.
10 things to do in each neighborhood. 10 reasons to be there.
Restaurants, coffee shops, art gallaries, libraries, parks.
10 public spaces where celebrations are held, social and economic exchanges occur, friends run into each other, and cultures mix.
When these spaces work well, they serve as the stage for our public lives.
The City of Indianapolis is proud to be one of six implementation partners in the Great Places 2020 initiative.
We are committed to leveraging our existing resources to invest in these neighborhoods:
In Englewood Village, for example, we are focused on improving infrastructure, growing the Farm 365 project and helping small businesses expand.
In Maple Crossing, transforming Tarkington Park into a destination urban park that will serve more than a dozen neighborhoods and help rejuvenate a key commercial node along a critical transportation corridor.
In River West, aiding in the renovation of the desolate Central State grounds into 1899, a beautiful and historic event venue.
With that in mind, with all of our neighborhoods, and homes, and families in mind – tonight I want to leave you not with something I have to tell you, but with a question I have for you?
What if?
Five short months ago, a new generation of leadership was called to serve the city in which they live.
And so, in the words of Indianapolis’ own Kurt Vonnegut, “here we are...trapped in the amber of this moment. There is no why.”
There is only how we will choose to live and to act.
Some will say that in attempting great things, our reach exceeds our grasp. To them I say, “yes, it does...because we have made our choice: in Indianapolis, we dare to dream again.”
We dare to ask the question – what if?
We do this because we live in an ever-changing, dynamic world. We do this because we do not have the luxury of stasis.
That is how cities die.
Great cities ask – what if?
Great cities are places that one must explore to fully appreciate. And Indianapolis is certainly worthy of exploration. A vibrant downtown, a historic race, historic neighborhoods with culture and art, and one of the largest municipal parks in the nation – Eagle Creek.
But...what if?
The cynics often remind us of Indianapolis limitations: “Indy can’t compete with cities set below snow-capped mountains or set beside oceans.”
And they are right – we don’t have mountains and oceans.
But we do have a choice. What if?
In setting our nation on a course to the moon, a President once told us that “we choose to go to the moon and do the other things – not because they are easy, but because they are hard.”
We choose to bring peace back to our neighborhoods...because it will be hard.
We choose to reform our criminal justice system...because it will be hard.
We choose to bring pre-K to every child in Indianapolis...because it will be hard.
We choose to bring light into the darkness of some of our neighborhoods...because it will be hard.
And at the end of the day, let no one say...let no one say...that we took the easy path, that we avoided the tough choices, that we ignored the challenges of our time.
For we choose to be one city...and together...we rise...we rise...we rise. I thank you.