Good evening. Buenas Tardes.
We are gathered here this evening to assess the state of our city ...
For me, this is personal. My roots in Los Angeles stretch back four generations, and spread to nearly every corner of this city — from the San Fernando Valley to Boyle Heights ... From South L.A. to the Westside.
These places are not just neighborhoods on a map, they’ve always been home to me.
Los vecindarios de esta ciudad siempre se han sentido como mi hogar.
And when I think of home, I think first and foremost of my family ... the people who made me who I am ... my parents ... my wife and partner Amy, who supports and inspires me every day ...
Tonight, I stand before you so deeply grateful — and so honored to serve alongside my city colleagues, Council President Herb Wesson ... our host tonight, Councilmember Joe Buscaino ... Members of the City Council ... and our City Controller...
￼Commissioners ... Neighborhood Council, business and labor leaders ... members of the Consular corps ... Neighborhood associations ... and most importantly, everyday Angelenos:
I am truly humbled to come before you for the third time, since I took office as your Mayor ...
Each year, I try to find a spot for this speech that means something to me personally, and to this city.
In our first year, we gathered near USC — where my father became the first in my family to graduate from college ... where my immigrant grandfather was a barber, who cut the hair of USC professors ...
We came together, that night, in the shadow of the Space Shuttle Endeavour — an awesome vehicle that was engineered here in Southern California, and soared to the heavens ... There, I launched our mission to get back to basics.
￼Last year, I went home to the San Fernando Valley, in the shadow of movie studios and our aerospace industry, to the campus of a distinguished university: Cal State Northridge. We spoke of L.A.’s future and the safety of our people.
Today, we gather here: not far from our city’s harbor, in communities that may look on a map like the forgotten tail of Los Angeles.
But for students of history — and for me, personally — they have always been the anchor of our city.
Harbor City, Harbor Gateway, Wilmington, and San Pedro are some of the first places where this city embraced its future as a truly great and global metropolis.
Down the street from here is our country’s largest and busiest cargo complex. Together, its twin ports are responsible for more than 40% of the goods brought into this country ... one out of every 51 jobs in America ... one out of every 9 in our region ...comes through our ports.
Already, in the first three months of 2016, nearly $45 billion dollars’ worth of goods have moved through our port — the busiest first quarter in its 109-year history.
￼This is America’s port... a vital economic engine that brings the world to our nation, and our nation to the world.
And this port is the reason we’ve come to this factory floor, to the headquarters of Noribachi, an amazing company that could only happen in America ... a success story that could only be told in Los Angeles.
Noribachi is the story of a married couple, who went into business together and achieved extraordinary success in Silicon Valley.
A few years later, they sold their software company and moved to New Mexico.
They could have retired comfortably ... but they’re entrepreneurs, so they launched Noribachi in Albuquerque, with the idea of manufacturing customized, LED lighting for the next century.
When we heard they were looking to grow their operations, my business team swung into action. We sold them on the proximity to America’s port — after all, Noribachi does business in nine countries ...
￼While New Mexico may have offered some lower taxes, Los Angeles put them closer to the nation’s most robust manufacturing supply chain — and that helped cut costs.
In the year since Noribachi moved to Los Angeles, the demand for their products has soared, and their staff more than doubled to 170 employees. Since coming to California, revenues are up 340%.
We helped land Noribachi because they reflect who we are as Angelenos, and who we want to be as a city: They’re high-tech. They’re inventive. They’re green. They’re global.
More importantly: they reflect our values. They embrace the old-fashioned American principle that employees should share in their company’s prosperity ...
Noribachi is going to pay their workers at least $15 dollars an hour ... not by 2022, not by 2020 ... but by the end of this year.
You see, businesses like this aren’t coming to Los Angeles by accident.
￼They’re coming here because this administration is working hard to create an environment where companies can expand, and create jobs.
When I raised my hand to become your mayor, I described City Hall as a place where jobs came to die. When companies came looking for help, they found none. And when they needed City Hall to get out of the way? We threw up one roadblock after another.
City Hall wasn’t focused on economic development ... Over the years, we added layer upon layer of red tape, instead of cutting it ... For two decades, our city leaders watched as others stole our legacy industries, from entertainment to aerospace ... We weren’t focusing on the working Angelenos who needed us most ... Our infrastructure was stretched and crumbling, our pipes were bursting ...
When I became your Mayor, I got to work turning City Hall around — focusing my team, and every city department, on a comprehensive jobs strategy built on re- energizing four core ideas:
1. Investing in infrastructure
2. Cutting taxes and red tape
3. Supporting our workers ... and, 4. Targeting key industries.
￼First, investing in infrastructure. Infrastructure is how you lay the foundation for a city’s future, and how you create good-paying, middle-class jobs now.
Los Angeles in 2016 is the undisputed local infrastructure capital of America. We’re spending $2.5 billion dollars over the next decade modernizing our port ... I greenlit a $14 billion dollar reimagining of our airport ... and we’re investing $40 billion dollars in our public transportation network.
Over the life of these projects, we will produce 560,000 good jobs for Angelenos — that’s more than the entire population of Atlanta.
Second, on top of infrastructure investment, we cut taxes and red tape — to help our businesses, and our skyline, grow.
And we’ve seen the success of our reform efforts — close to 38,000 new housing units, the most in 25 years ... we’ve passed more than $160 million dollars in tax relief for L.A. businesses, MONEY THEY CAN invest in jobs and factories right here ... And this past year, we were home to nearly $7 billion dollars in active building development, WHICH SET a new record for our city.
￼Today, developments like the Wilshire Grand — which just topped off as the tallest building west of the Mississippi — are reaching for new heights.
Third, along with investing in infrastructure, and making it easier to do business here, we’re investing in our workers.
L.A. County has one of the nation’s greatest disparities when it comes to what people pay in rent, and what they take home in wages. And, for too long, we weren’t doing enough to close that gap. Angelenos were working harder and harder, but falling farther behind.
So, I launched a successful campaign — together with the great support of our City Council, labor, and business leaders — and this past year, we enacted the largest anti-poverty measure in our city’s history, raising the minimum wage to $15 dollars an hour.
When the biggest city, in the biggest state in the nation, leads ... others follow. L.A. County ... Surrounding cities ...
￼And just last week, California became the first state in our nation to guarantee a $15 dollar an hour minimum wage. That began right here. In Los Angeles.
La semana pasada, California se convirtió en el primer estado en la nación en garantizar un salario mínimo de quince dolares por hora. Eso comenzó aquí.
This isn’t new, uncharted territory — this is a return to traditional American values that say if you work hard, you shouldn’t live in poverty, or work two or three jobs to make ends meet. You should have time at home to help your kids with their homework ... to share a meal with your loved ones.
And our investment in workers isn’t just about raising the wage — it’s also about raising the roof ... landing those jobs that pay $30 and $45 dollars an hour, which will ensure we build the middle class for the next generation.
That means focusing on access and skills for our people.
IT’S why we launched the JobsLA app just last month, which puts 150,000 job prospects in the palm of your hand, through your smartphone ... it’s why we created new job centers in communities with the greatest need, because City Hall should meet you where you live ... it’s why we more than doubled the size of our
￼youth jobs program from 5,000 to 12,000, so that our children can feel the pride of their first paychecks — paychecks that will propel them on a path to prosperity.
And I am here to announce that, this year, we will connect 15,000 young people to jobs, tripling the number of youth jobs since I took office.
That’s not all.
We know success in life begins with success in the classroom — That’s why Superintendent Michelle King and I are working together closely to open up access to green space on our public school campuses, MAKING significant investments in arts education, and ensuring that every student has a library card with their name on it.
That’s why we are so focused on youth jobs and educational opportunities like our initiatives to bring STEM and coding classes to all of our neighborhoods, why our Promise Zone is seeing graduation rates rise and opportunities expand.
And tonight, Los Angeles will become the largest city in the nation to commit ourselves to a new goal:
￼Every hard working student who graduates from LAUSD will receive one free year of community college.
Cada estudiante que se dedique y se gradue de LAUSD va a recibir un año gratis en nuestros colegios comunitarios.
In last year’s State of the Union, President Obama proposed this idea as America’s College Promise. Here in Los Angeles, I am working with LAUSD, and our great partners at the Community College District, to make that promise real. Thank you, Chancellor Francisco Rodriguez, Board President Scott Svonkin, and Trustees Mike Fong and Nancy Pearlman for your help and your leadership.
We know that when you plant the seed of college early ... when you help kids secure internships in high school ... when you show young people the pathway toward career success ... it inspires them to do better. It incentivizes them to graduate. It helps academic achievement soar.
It ensures that we won’t just attract the best people in the world to L.A., we’ll help them grow up right here.
￼Finally, in addition to infrastructure investments, making our city business-friendly and supporting our workers, our fourth strategy is targeting key industries — industries like aerospace, manufacturing, digital technology, green jobs, and Hollywood — to create the jobs of today, and the careers of tomorrow.
And it’s working: Thanks to our leadership in tripling the state’s film tax credit, last year we brought back $1.7 billion dollars in economic activity that would otherwise be happening elsewhere.
That means the people who light the sets, who drive the trucks — they’re practicing their craft in L.A. again ... they’re spending money in their own neighborhoods ... and laying their heads down on their own pillows at the end of the day.
This year, 45 network pilots are shooting in L.A. — more than any other city in the U.S. or Canada.
Lethal Weapon. Four Stars. Cruel Intentions. 24:Legacy. These television pilots all shot here.
My friends, Hollywood is coming home.
￼That’s changing the lives of people like a fourth-generation Angeleno, who broke into the entertainment business in 2008 as a location scout.
But at that time, film tax credits in New York, Georgia, and New Mexico had lured so many productions away, that it was hard to find work in Hollywood.
But today? He’s never seen more opportunity right here at home. Last year, he landed a job on “American Horror Story” — which won the tax credit and returned to Los Angeles after filming two seasons in New Orleans.
And we’re not just targeting Hollywood.
We’re targeting green jobs, opening the world’s #1 clean tech incubator, home to over 48 companies and $70 million dollars in venture capital...
We’re targeting digital technology, where our reforms and our outreach have helped make L.A. County the tech jobs capital of America ... From Downtown to Playa Vista, from North Hollywood to San Pedro — this is our tech moment.
￼And we’re targeting aerospace, where we went after — and won — a federal advanced manufacturing designation that has already brought in $120 million dollars, and counting, to modernize our aerospace workforce and assembly lines.
Thanks to these efforts, Los Angeles City Hall is widening the circle of opportunity ... and we’re seeing those benefits ripple across every corner of our city.
The summer before I came into office, our unemployment rate peaked at more than 12%.
Today, unemployment isn’t down a little bit — we’ve cut it by more than half. We’ve added 109,000 new jobs in Los Angeles.
Hoy en día, el desempleo no a rebajado un poco — lo hemos reducido por la mitad — ciento nueve mil nuevos trabajos.
Now, some may say this is just coincidental ... that we’re riding a national wave. But that’s not what the numbers say. Just look at the last year: Unemployment was cut by 9% in the United States. In California, it dropped 18%.
￼But here in Los Angeles? Last year alone, we cut unemployment 25%, nearly three times the national average.
In Los Angeles we’re not riding the wave — we’re creating one.
Just as America’s goods come through this port, America’s recovery is coming through this city.
Economic prosperity translates into a better life for all of us. It helps the city to improve our core services and get back to basics.
Today: We’ve more than tripled the number of trees we trimmed ... We’ve set records for street paving at 2,400 miles a year, enough to stretch from Los Angeles to New York City ... We’ve hired firefighters for the first time in five years.
At the DWP, we’ve fixed a broken billing system, slashed call wait times from 40 minutes to less than 20 seconds, focused on customer service, and passed a modest rate hike to ensure bursting pipes aren’t a mainstay on the evening news. This year, we will go further — by leading the campaign to pass a ballot measure that will reform the DWP once and for all.
￼After all, this is your utility.
We haven’t just reduced the city’s budget deficit — a quarter billion dollars when I took office — next week, I will present a balanced budget to our city, one that restores services and brings our reserve fund to a record high.
Our bond rating is up. And those cracked sidewalks across Los Angeles?
This year, we will spend $31 million dollars to fix our sidewalks — that’s not just the most in a decade, that’s the most in our city’s history.
This is what government looks like when it works for the people. And because of these efforts — there’s a renewed sense of optimism about our city.
When I go on trade missions to places like Mexico, Korea, and China, global companies are competing to lay our rail lines, modernize our airport, and invest in our city. And when the meeting’s over, those same executives are buzzing about the Broad Museum ... or the Petersen ... or the Wizarding World of Harry Potter ... they want to come here.
￼In Austin, at South-by-Southwest, they’re talking about the new tech companies moving to Los Angeles... In Paris, at the UN Climate Conference, they’re talking about our city’s bold initiatives to ensure a clean energy future ... Around the world, people are excited about what we’re doing here in Los Angeles.
And that excitement is reflected on our street corners: on Wilshire ... on Vermont ... on Ventura — ask Angelenos, and more than 8 out of 10 will tell you they feel good about the direction of their neighborhood.
And why shouldn’t people be optimistic about Los Angeles?
They’re seeing an attention to detail they thought government had given up on. They’re seeing a sense of ambition that — after two decades of riots, earthquakes, and the Great Recession — they feared no longer existed.
An ambition that says L.A. can do big things — like pass the most sweeping seismic safety plan in this nation, which we did last year with the City Council. When the Big One hits, this will protect more than a half-million people in our most vulnerable buildings.
￼Last year, we hosted the largest sporting event in the world, the Special Olympics World Games...
We brought mayors from both sides of the Pacific together for the first-ever U.S.- China Climate Leaders Summit ...
The Army Corps of Engineers approved our plan to restore the L.A. River... We’re competing to bring the Summer Olympics back to American soil in 2024 ...
And the L.A. Rams are finally coming home...
This is our Los Angeles today: A place with a big heart, a fierce spirit, eyes on the future, and a collective resolve to make tomorrow better than today.
Here in L.A., we don’t run from our challenges, we embrace them ... We don’t shy away from opportunities, we reach for them.
And we remain clear-eyed about the challenges that persist in our city, and the role that our government must play in meeting them.
￼Even though our economy is booming, I’ve often said you can’t average out prosperity — it can’t just be measured by our unemployment rate ... or by the total wealth in our city. Our progress needs to be felt by every Angeleno.
The challenges we face today — of poverty, homelessness, traffic, crime, discrimination, and protecting our middle class — these problems may not affect each of us equally, but they are ours to confront together.
In less than three years, we’ve transformed City Hall from a place of closed doors and backroom deals, to one of openness and accountability.
That’s why we shared our data with the public — and put it online for everyone to see. I’m proud we did it ... but it wasn’t painless.
Last summer, for instance, the L.A. Times used our data to show an unacceptable disparity in the cleanup of illegally dumped items.
Since I took office, I was proud that we had picked up more than 6,000 tons of illegally dumped garbage ... We were meeting 99 percent of requests in many neighborhoods ... But the story rightfully pointed out that parts of our city, like
￼South L.A., Highland Park, and Westlake, were still littered with abandoned tires and old mattresses.
Instead of getting defensive, we got to work.
I ordered our Bureau of Sanitation to eliminate these disparities, and clear the backlog right away ...
And tonight I can say, when a resident of South L.A. reports that something has been illegally dumped in her neighborhood, it gets picked up as quickly as it would in Pacific Palisades or Panorama City.
Just last week, we built on that progress, by launching CleanStat L.A., a core part of our Clean Streets Initiative. City workers drove every block of every neighborhood and graded the condition of our 9,100 miles of streets. We’re the first city in the nation to do this.
They found that 370 miles — or 4% of our streets and alleys — were in dire need of cleaning. We’re going to target those streets. We’re putting more boots on the ground, and more cans on our corners. When I started as mayor, we had no money allocated for proactively cleaning illegal dumping.
￼This year’s budget will increase funding for the third year in a row — to $12 million dollars —for this work. We are cleaning up our city.
And those principles — of openness and accountability — they shape how we confront another challenge that every Angeleno has a stake in: public safety.
Crime has been going in the wrong direction in most large cities across America, and unfortunately, that includes Los Angeles.
Now, our city remains as safe as it was in the late 1950s ... but that doesn’t mean much if you heard gunshots on your block last night. Nothing is more fundamental than the safety of our neighborhoods. Nothing is more important than secure streets for our children and families to walk on.
That’s why our approach to crime reduction has to be smart and targeted ...
￼For instance, when we saw that domestic violence was fueling much of the uptick in aggravated assaults, we fast-tracked expansion of our Domestic Abuse Response Teams — to give Angelenos facing abuse a way out.
And I’m proud to say they’re operating in every police division now — a full six months ahead of schedule.
We’re making targeted investments in our police force — my budget expands overtime for our officers by $10 million dollars, and hires civilians to take over desk jobs. Cops belong in our communities, not in cubicles. Together, these steps are the equivalent of putting 260 more officers on the street.
We know that four of LAPD’s 21 divisions are bearing the brunt of the uptick in crime. That’s why — just last month — we launched the Community Safety Operations Center in South Los Angeles. The Center focuses our efforts on the relatively small number of people who are responsible for the large share of violence in our neighborhoods.
In less than a month, officers in those divisions led a two-thirds increase in arrests of people carrying firearms.
￼Last year, we recovered 6,900 firearms — the most in five years. We’re going to keep taking guns — and shooters — off the streets of Los Angeles.
As we take these steps, we must also have an honest conversation about what may be fueling this increase in crime.
So many men and women are returning home from prison without job prospects or anyone to turn to ... The safety net that was supposed to come with criminal justice reform? It’s simply not there.
We feel the impact in our communities of this failure to provide folks with real opportunities — to stay out of prison, and off drugs ... to get a job, or a degree.
So we’re calling on Washington and Sacramento to help — to fund our prosecutors and our programs. But while we’re advocating there, we’re acting here. The situation is simply too urgent to wait.
That’s why, this year, I opened an Office of Reentry, for the first time since Tom Bradley was mayor ... And today, we’re putting the final touches on a $9 million- dollar agreement with Caltrans to create a jobs program to train and permanently employ 1,350 formerly incarcerated Angelenos ...
￼That’s not all. Over the next four years, the City of Los Angeles will provide education and job training to an additional 1,500 former gang members, thanks to the leadership of City Attorney Feuer.
And over the next two years, we will be hiring 5,000 new city employees — targeting recruitment in communities with the most need, including ex-offenders.
For thousands of individuals, these are transformative opportunities ... a chance for people to redefine themselves through integrity and hard work.
That’s happening for people like a young man I know — a lifelong Angeleno who grew up on the Eastside. Like too many people, he got mixed up with a gang. He committed a crime for which he spent almost a decade in prison ...
When he got out, he resolved to turn his life around. He was 28, had never held a job, and kept being turned away from the ones he sought. Some might say he needed a second chance ... Others might say he never really had a first.
￼Until he found Homeboy Industries. He took anger management classes and is getting his gang tattoos lasered off. Homeboy gave him a job cleaning toilets and washing floors. He gave them 100%, and never missed a day of work.
Today, just three years later, he is running a program that trains formerly incarcerated Angelenos to install solar panels and put clean energy on our grid.
Last year I brought home $6 million dollars from Washington to start L.A. Rise, a program that supports organizations like Homeboy, and helps Angelenos like this young man enter the workforce — ready for their future, and ready to help define ours.
Stories like his remind us that every job that we create ...every statistic that we talk about ... these are not just numbers on a page, they’re real people.
Understanding the struggles of the people I represent — that’s my job as mayor. Responding to them is my greatest responsibility.
I come to City Hall every day with one purpose: to advance the public good in this city ... to transform lives for the better.
￼We see that transformation all around us ... We see it in the experiences of a woman who, after living in Los Angeles for 35 years, is becoming a citizen with help from the City.
She moved here as a teenager from the Philippines, after her father passed away, and her childhood home burned down.
This Angeleno grew up here, she graduated here, fell in love here, got married here, and built a career in the public sector right here.
But she was a legal permanent resident who never pursued U.S. citizenship, until she found out how easy the process could be in her city ...
She visited a Citizenship Corner in one of our 73 branch libraries — where trained staff and free classes help Angelenos make real the dream of citizenship.
This woman is one of 25,000 people the City has helped through one of these corners ...
￼That’s 25,000 of our family members, friends, neighbors, and co-workers ... Taxpayers, and students who have an even greater stake in the future of Los Angeles ...
It lifts up our entire community when immigrants become part of our civic discourse, when they earn a better wage, and when they have a voice in their city’s, and their nation’s, future.
Here in L.A., we don’t build walls, we build bridges.
Es beneficioso para toda nuestra comunidad cuando los inmigrantes se integran a nuestro discurso cívico, cuando ganan un mejor sueldo, y cuando tienen una voz en el futuro de su ciudad y nación. Aquí en Los Ángeles, no construimos muros, construimos puentes.
We see our power to transform lives in other stories, as well ...
Like a young man whose family was struggling just to make ends meet. His parents were both unemployed. A serious accident left his mother unable to hold down a job. His father was undocumented.
￼The family survived on public assistance, stretching every dollar to cover the essentials: the rent on their one-room apartment ... food for the dinner table.
This young man wanted to step up for his family — provide for his mom and dad, help his brother and sister. He was just 14 years old.
So, on his summer break, he came to one of our City’s youth job centers and got a paid internship — and he learned to work with others and lead a team.
And the City also helped him to prepare for a huge youth job fair that my office co- sponsored in January — the largest in L.A.’s history.
He walked into that employment fair at the Convention Center ... And he walked out with a job, as did more than 1,000 of his peers.
We see our power to transform lives in the story of a janitor who works at LAX.
When he first arrived in the United States from Guatemala, he was just scraping by. Determined to do better, he took English classes, and started fighting for his slice of the American dream. He applied for a job at the airport and got it ...
￼Now, he goes to work every day and sees the faces of tourists coming to Hollywood, families who are reuniting, and business travelers coming to invest in our city — some of the record 75 million passengers who came through LAX last year
He sees the investments we’re making at LAX – new terminals, restaurants, and shops, because we’re giving the entire airport a facelift ...
And soon, that janitor will see trains bringing people to the planes — because I am fixing one of the great mistakes of our past, by finally connecting rail to LAX.
We’re using the power of City Hall to build a great airport and a great life for workers, too. Thanks to an agreement we hammered out at the airport, this janitor is earning $15 an hour, plus benefits.
Because a world-class city should have a first-class airport ... and a middle class workforce.
Finally, we see our power to transform lives in the story of a single mother I met last fall.
￼She’s a Navy veteran, a fellow shipmate who lost her job and found herself with no choice but to sleep in her car. Thanks to our Homes for Heroes initiative, I was able to help move her, and her family, into a new home this past Veterans Day.
That morning, we all jumped on the single air mattress her daughters had been sharing and deflated it, once and for all. And then we built a brand-new bunk bed to take its place.
She’s one of 6,000 formerly homeless veterans we have housed in Los Angeles — more than Houston, Phoenix, Salt Lake City, and New Orleans combined ... the most of any city in the United States.
En Los Ángeles hemos alojado a mas de seis mil veteranos sin hogar - más que las ciudades de Houston, Phoenix, Salt Lake City, y Nueva Orleans combinadas.
But there are still about 1,700 homeless veterans left in this city, and we will fight until we complete the mission and bring every last one of them home.
￼And we need to do more than bring them home — we need to connect them jobs. I’m proud to say that my 10,000 Strong veterans hiring initiative has already connected 7,600 veterans to employment.
These kinds of outcomes are only possible when we aim for bold targets ... When we realize that our most sacred calling is to ensure opportunity for all, regardless of their circumstances. Because our circumstances should not define us ...
A “dropout,” that’s just a young woman who’s lost her way. An “undocumented immigrant,” is often an American by every measure, except the papers he holds.
“The homeless” in our city — they’re not some permanent class of people. They are fellow Angelenos who have fallen on hard times ... and need us to extend a helping hand.
And I think that’s something all of us can relate to ...
Even if your situation isn’t as dire as living in under a freeway overpass, this city’s housing crisis affects all of us.
￼People are nervous about the prospect of owning their own home. They worry about being able to make the rent.
The root cause isn’t complicated. It’s a matter of supply and demand: we haven’t built enough housing to keep up with our population growth.
We can all agree: we need more affordable housing here in Los Angeles.
It’s pretty simple: If we’re building luxury high rises, we need to build homes for middle-class families ... and apartments that working Angelenos can afford.
That’s why I introduced a plan to double the number of affordable units that we build and preserve every year.
In this city, affordable housing should not be a privilege ...it’s a right.
And as we build more housing, neighborhoods need to trust that we’re setting clear rules of the road — which is why my new budget fully funds, for the first time, updates to every one of our 35 community plans ... giving Angelenos an opportunity to take ownership of the growth, development, and character of their neighborhoods.
￼Together, we will put an end to the era of special perks for special projects.
Now, we’ve heard a lot of ideas about how to address this crisis. Some have even proposed a moratorium on building. I want to find common ground that we can agree upon...
But let me say one thing loud and clear: We cannot put the brakes on development. That will not get us out of this crisis — it will only make things worse. Fewer housing units means more people getting priced out of this city.
And that’s not who we are as Angelenos. We don’t push people out — we come together. Nobody in this city is disposable — Each one of us is indispensable.
And each of us has a role to play in building a more equitable, livable Los Angeles.
In the year ahead, I want to focus on two of our city’s most stubborn challenges: Traffic and homelessness. Everyone here has white-knuckled the steering wheel during rush hour. Everyone has seen the growing encampments around town.
We need to make urgent short-term fixes — and implement long-term solutions.
￼Because I don’t want to solve a problem for just one year ... or even five or ten years — I want to solve problems for the next generation. And in the year ahead, we’re going to ask you to be a part of that.
It starts with traffic ... We lose billions of dollars, and millions of hours, every year in the congestion that clogs our streets.
Unless we act now, it will only get worse. L.A. County’s population is expected to grow by more than a half-million people over the next decade.
But if we invest now, we can finish the job we started.
Just think of what we’ve already achieved through Measure R, and our aggressive lobbying in Washington:
Next month, we’re going to open the Expo Line extension to Santa Monica — and for the first time in more than a half century, we’re going to connect the skyline to the shoreline.
￼Last month, we pushed our Gold Line extension east to Azusa. And right now, the Crenshaw-LAX line is nearly halfway done, just two years after we broke ground.
This investment means that a woman who works at a downtown tech company can get to the office on time. This woman says that, without the Gold Line, she couldn’t have taken that job. The drive would have taken too much time away from her family.
Now, she uses public transit and gets two-and-a-half hours back each week to spend with her son, who just celebrated his first birthday.
That’s what’s at stake. That’s what this is about.
Together, we can accelerate the progress we’ve made by approving, in November, a $120-billion-dollar investment that completes our comprehensive rail and bus network.
As part of this plan, I want to see the San Fernando Valley get its fair share, with light rail traveling down Van Nuys Boulevard...
￼I want to build a tunnel through the Sepulveda Pass to relieve congestion on the 405 ...
I want to finally connect Metro Rail to LAX ...
I want to connect Burbank airport to Universal Studios..
I want to extend the Foothill Gold Line farther east, to Ontario Airport...
I want to connect the Green Line east to Amtrak and Metrolink ... and south to the neighborhoods surrounding this community...
I want to build our future — and I want us to build it together.
Second, we must continue to aggressively tackle our homelessness crisis and find homes for the 25,000 Angelenos who have none.
Beyond the extraordinary human toll, keeping people on the streets costs much more than finding them housing.
￼So many of these Angelenos bear the brunt of cuts to state mental health services ... of a criminal justice system that lacks a safety net.
It’s a lesson we’ve learned the hard way — through decades of failure and ill- conceived attempts to shunt the problem from neighborhood to neighborhood. Bureaucracy to bureaucracy. Jurisdiction to jurisdiction.
I will not perpetuate that failure one moment longer. In the last year, we have made meaningful progress.
A year ago, the City and County were not working together ... A year ago, we had only 18 outreach workers extending a hand to tens of thousands of homeless Angelenos ... A year ago, we had no comprehensive strategy to take on homelessness in our city ... And a year ago, we had no commitment of new dollars.
But today, the city and the county are fighting this battle hand in hand.
Today, we have nearly tripled the number of outreach workers across the County.
￼Today, for the first time in City history, we are using general fund dollars to cover housing vouchers.
Today, we have a historic plan that will get people into homes more quickly than ever before.
And tonight, I am proud to announce that the budget I will present to the City Council next week goes above and beyond our $100-million-dollar commitment to address homelessness.
My budget will dedicate $138 million dollars to get homeless people off the streets. That increases our investment in housing and services by ten-fold.
Mi presupuesto dedicará ciento treinta y ocho millones de dólares para ayudar a que las personas indigentes puedan tener un hogar propio. Eso multiplica nuestra inversión en las viviendas y los servicios por diez.
It wasn’t easy...We stretched, we reached, we collaborated, we searched for every LAST penny ... but we had to do it. Homelessness is, and has to be, our top priority — after all, lives are on the line.
￼But if we’re going to win this fight ... if we’re going to lift our brothers and sisters out of homelessness once and for all ... we can’t count on a one-year stretch — we need to find a sustained source of funding.
That’s why I’m calling on the City Council to pass my linkage fee proposal. And that’s why, by this time next year, we intend to ask voters to approve funding for our comprehensive plan to combat homelessness ...
In all of the issues that I’ve touched on tonight, we are talking about challenges created over many years, even decades. Problems that can’t be solved overnight, but problems that can be solved.
When I think of them in relation to our moment in history, I’m reminded of the great things we have accomplished, and the people who came before us:
I’m reminded of a nation that looked to the west, and the workers who broke their backs building railways and roads to link two great coasts...
￼I’m reminded of a state that envisioned water flowing down our seaboard, and then built the aqueducts that made this place possible...
I’m reminded of a city that looked to the sky with wonder and purpose and kicked off the space age...
I’m reminded of the dreamers who saw a harbor on the edge of a continent, and seized the destiny of a metropolis...
I mean if Kobe Bryant could post 60 points and lead his team to victory in his final game...c’mon, we can do this too.
And we can do this because this is who we are: As Americans ... as Californians ... as Angelenos ... as people.
We reach for new heights, we dig to new depths, we dream of things yet unseen.
And tonight, I am here to tell you — my fellow Angelenos — that we are up to this task.
￼We’ve heard some people’s stories tonight — people who are living testament to the big things we can do ... and the lives we can touch. These Angelenos are here with us this evening, and I’d like you to meet them.
The founders of Noribachi, who moved operations here, to take advantage of our port, and cement L.A.’s position as the green jobs capital of the world ... Thank you, Rhonda and Farzad Dibachi.
Remember the Angeleno who’s finding work in Hollywood again ... That’s David Flannery and he’s here with us tonight.
That young man, who’s turned his life around and is training former gang members for green jobs? David Andrade. It’s his birthday tomorrow.
The longtime public servant who got support at one of our libraries and will soon be an American citizen? My friend, Yey Coronel.
The man who’s earning $15 dollars an hour at LAX, like so many in our city, county, and state soon will ... Exequiel (Eh-Seh-Keeyel) Juarez Ramos.
￼The teenager who found work at our city’s largest youth job fair? Benjamin Rodas ... And he just started his new job at Starbucks yesterday. Congratulations, Benjamin.
The tech worker, the new mother, who saves time by commuting on the Gold Line downtown — Kristen Spiotto.
And the veteran I helped move into a new home? Her name is Lakiesha Anthony, and she’s right here, with her three beautiful girls.
Each one of them reminds us what we, as a city, are working toward, and what we, as individuals, are capable of.
This is who I’m fighting for. Es por ellos que estoy luchando. This is our Los Angeles.
And the state of our city — their city, your city — is not only strong, it’s getting stronger every day. Thank you all very much!
