Thanks to everyone in this room for your warm welcome and for making the time to be here
today.
I must begin by expressing my appreciation to the Chambers of Commerce who jointly create this event. Please stand when I call your name so that we can recognize this group of leaders: 2017 Chair of the San Antonio Chamber of Commerce Board, Rad Weaver; Chairman of the San Antonio Hispanic Chamber of Commerce, Dr. Esteban Lopez; President of the Alamo Asian American Chamber of Commerce, Elisa Chan; Chairman of the Alamo City Black Chamber of Commerce, Deborah Omowale; Members of the Chamber’s Boards of Directors; as well as all their staff members who are here today.
And of course we should thank all the staff and servers who make events like this possible. 
I also want to recognize my City Council colleagues and our City Manager, Sheryl Sculley, and all her staff.
Thank you to my team, the dedicated staff in my office.
And thank you to my dear husband Rodney Taylor—without his support I would not be able to do this job. And I certainly wouldn’t look so good doing it.
I look forward to this event every year…but with a lot of soul searching around the theme, and how to convey the progress that has occurred since our last gathering. This year we landed on the idea of “A City with Heart”. So get ready for a love fest!
When I think about the “heart” of San Antonio, I think about three distinct characteristics our city shows – our courage, our caring and our character. All that comprises our community’s
“Corazon”.
San Antonio is a City with Heart.
San Antonio is a city where we come together to help during a disaster.
San Antonio is a city where we celebrate together—as often as possible!
San Antonio is an international city and also a place where it feels like everyone is your neighbor.
And San Antonio is a city where everyone should have a chance to succeed.
You’ve heard my vision for San Antonio -- being a globally competitive city where every resident is connected to opportunities for prosperity. With hard work and a lot of heart, we are making steady progress toward reaching this vision. Contrary to some accounts, the evidence shows that not only is the state of our city incredibly strong, but the future of our city is blindingly bright!
Let me ask you --What does it take to come back to the table after years of difficult disagreement with heated rhetoric?
It takes heart. Thank you, Mike Helle and the San Antonio Police Officers Association, for meeting me halfway to restart negotiations. Our agreement saves taxpayer dollars and provides appropriate wage increases for our brave officers who work hard for our citizens every day. Acting with the courage of our convictions, we got a deal done.
What does it take to breathe life back into our bid for a new federal courthouse? 
It takes courage and character, exemplified by Senator John Cornyn and Representative Henry Cuellar. They helped bring home $120 million dollars in support of a building that will change the face of our civic district in downtown San Antonio.
What does it take to change the way we collaborate so that the men and women who served our country in uniform are no longer at risk for experiencing homelessness?
It takes heart.
Thank you to USAA, to our public and non-profit partners, to all the volunteers and service providers who created an incredible coalition to significantly impact Veteran Homelessness in San Antonio because in Military City USA, no veteran should be sleeping on the street.
In months to come, we’ll open the Veterans Outreach and Transition center in East San Antonio thru a collaboration with St. Philips college to provide additional support to our veterans who are returning to civilian life.
And speaking of our status as Military City USA, just recently, we celebrated the 100 year anniversary of Kelly Field and the reopening of Hangar Nine at Brooks City Base. And this year we received the coveted Association of Defense Communities “Great American Community Award,” a real honor.
I know some of our senior military leaders have joined us here today. Please stand, Generals Pringle, Buchanan, Roberson and Admiral McCormick Boyle. Thank you for your service!
What does it take to convert two former military bases into economic generators that include thousands of jobs in healthcare, manufacturing and cybersecurity? It definitely takes courage.
Thanks to all the community leaders, including board members, who were involved in the successful conversions of Kelly Field and Brooks AFB into Port San Antonio and Brooks City Base. Those two anchors are generating opportunities for thousands of San Antonians.
In a couple of weeks, we will have the ability to make major investments in Brooks City Base, Port San Antonio and the rest of San Antonio through our 2017 Bond – One SA.
Did you know that more than 70% of the 2017 bond addresses streets and drainage, and that includes 200 miles of sidewalks?
I want to thank our One San Antonio Tri-Chairs – Eddie Aldrete, Cari Baker and Darryl Byrd – as well as all the citizen volunteers who spent thousands of hours vetting the proposal.
Thanks to all the Chambers for the work you have done to support the bond and to ensure that San Antonians turn out to vote in this important issue.
Our historic 850 million dollar bond issue will help us implement our SA Tomorrow plan—the first-ever comprehensive plan for our city. As a parent I know that when you love someone as much as you do your children, you plan for them: you plan for their future to ensure that they have access to all kinds of opportunities.
SA Tomorrow is a plan for a City with Heart. Our thirteen regional centers will provide accessible, affordable places to live, work and play, the kinds of hip urban centers that our sons and daughters will want to come home to and where our parents can enjoy an active life. And our Sustainability plan ensures that our kids will have the resources to pay for it, and that our air and water will still be healthy and protected.
Our multimodal transportation plan will literally connect people to opportunity—not just through improved transit, roads and sidewalks but through innovations like real-time crowd-sourcing for travel routes and automated vehicle-to-vehicle technology.
During the coming months I look forward to working with our transportation and advocacy communities to determine the best strategy or strategies to expand funding for our outstanding public transit agency, VIA, as they implement their 2040 plan--a component of our transportation plan. VIA is of critical importance in making SA Tomorrow, Vision Zero, and our Smart City initiatives a reality.
As we work together to improve our infrastructure, create jobs and plan for the next 1 million inhabitants, we can’t lose sight of that pulsing heart and uniqueness of our community. The immediate opportunity to embrace what that really means is through our biggest birthday yet.
We are less than 300 days away from San Antonio’s Tricentennial celebration. Our Tricentennial Commission, under the leadership of Father David Garcia, Chairman Robert Thrailkill, Katie Luber, and Dr. Alfonso Chiscano has been busy for months planning an amazing year of cultural, historical and artistic celebrations.
The Tricentennial is a pivotal time in our city’s history and will be a catalyst for cultural and economic growth, similar to Hemisfair in 1968. We expect 260,000 MORE visitors next year, another 1,300 jobs, and an overall positive impact of nearly $120 million to our economy.
On your table are cards that note the Tricentennial’s website. I encourage you to log on and I challenge you to find ways to get involved.
It all begins on December 31st of this year. We want every corner, nook and cranny of San Antonio to be represented, so bring us your ideas, from neighborhood art installations to major sporting events.
San Antonio’s roots and our heart are international and so is our future as a globally competitive city. Visitors from all over the world will participate in our Tricentennial, and one group I am especially excited to invite is our brothers and sisters in our newest sister city, Windhoek, the capital of Namibia.
Last fall, we took our first trade mission to Windhoek which is experiencing a prolonged and dangerous drought. The City of San Antonio, through SAWS, will soon sign an MOU to share expertise and ideas related to operating water reuse systems and to foster the development of collaborative projects, programs, research and educational exchanges for the benefit of both water agencies.
I am also pleased to report that one of CPSenergy’s new energy economy companies will soon sign a major agreement that will allow them to service all the southern portion of Africa.
That’s one example of a creative approach to generate additional economic activity to benefit San Antonians.
Creativity and innovation will continue to create a path forward for us in the years to come. I am proud of our tech innovators and their commitment to improving quality of life and creating jobs.
I recently met with Morris Miller, CEO of San Antonio-based Xenex, to learn about their disinfecting robot. In less than 5 minutes, using pulsed xenon gas, their device can reduce infections by 50 to 100%--and it even works against anthrax, ebola and drug-resistant super bugs. Xenex is saving lives every day, all across the world.
Innovative technology certainly will be the platform for many of our community’s future jobs.
The Economic Innovation group recently reported that two-thirds of all American cities are shedding jobs, and that businesses are dying faster than start-ups can replace them—but that’snot true in San Antonio. In fact, San Antonio is one of the few U.S. cities that is actually ADDING net new jobs every year.
An inspiring example of a new local company is Cityflag, a mobile app that puts municipal government in the palm of your hands. The team members that created it aren’t from San Antonio, but while attending UTSA, they fell in love with our city and made the very deliberate decision to stay here and grow their business.
Just last month, Cityflag won the contract to redesign and run the city’s 3-1-1 app, and soon you will be able to request city services or flag issues on your phone.
Cityflag’s CEO is joining us today and I’d like us to congratulate him. Beto Altamirano, please stand to be recognized.
With all these great tech jobs being created, of course we must prepare San Antonians to fill them. There are several efforts underway on that front… and I have to acknowledge the Chambers’ continued leadership in workforce and skills development. Thank you.
We have the Open Cloud Academy which provides students with the knowledge and skills they need to enter into our growing IT workforce.
And later this year, SAISD’s CAST Tech high school will open its doors to about 150 freshman at the old Fox Tech campus. Thanks to partners like HEB, AT&T, Rackspace, USAA, TechBloc and Geekdom, this high school will be the first of its kind in San Antonio to be career-themed around in-demand fields like cyber security, coding and gaming.
CAST Tech helps us address our single most pressing economic development challenge: upskilling our workforce.
Hiring Jenna Saucedo Herrera to lead our Economic Development Foundation and Romanita Mata Barrera to head up the new SA Works effort has brought critical new energy and know- how to this issue.
We have a fresh, innovative approach to workforce -- from reaching adult learners through the new Upgrade program… to refining our San Antonio Education Partnership investment to achieve our college attainment goals… to supporting and expanding our award winning Alamo
Academies program.
We’ve even made changes to our workforce agency’s organizational structure and I’ve taken a seat on the Project Quest Board, so that all of these initiatives can be brought into alignment.
As more jobs and opportunities result from technological innovations, a city with heart, like San Antonio cannot let residents fall behind.
Through my Mayors Digital Inclusion Initiative, we’ve been working for over a year on developing partnerships that provide San Antonians with training, devices and access to high speed internet so they won’t be left behind.
Thank you to the San Antonio Housing Authority for running the Connect Home program to benefit public housing residents. I also want to thank our San Antonio Public Library and BibiloTech for their outstanding, one-on-one services to help close the digital divide. Many of your companies are already involved -- but if you are not, please consider donating your time as a mentor or donating needed equipment so that all San Antonians can take advantage of the opportunities offered by the 21st century economy. There’s a card by your place setting—please fill it out and get involved in internships or digital literacy! 
Through SA Works, we are building out a system where any San Antonian can connect to skills building and job training opportunities so they can compete for jobs that are being created here every day—not just in tech, but in many other growth sectors.
And while internships are an important part of SA Works’s mission, they do so much more.
Judge Wolff and I are working with board leaders David Crouch and Kate Rogers, and with guidance from EDF which houses SA Works, to position them to make a major contribution to filling San Antonio’s talent pipeline. Other critical partners are industry leaders like those of you here today, our school districts and the Alamo Colleges.
I do want to acknowledge Judge Nelson Wolff for his lifetime of service to our community, not just in this area but across the board. Thank you, Judge—you are a great partner!
While San Antonio must take care of its business at home in relation to creating jobs and ensuring we have a skilled workforce, its equally important for us to recognize that those components are also part of the regional picture.
San Antonio is part of a vibrant region that includes all of the cities in Bexar County and the cities between here and Austin. In the past year, we began communicating and working together in new and different ways. San Antonio and Austin are working together to solve transportation problems and leverage each other’s economic strengths along the I-35 corridor.
I’ve had the opportunity to meet with the Mayors between our cities and we’re certain that our area, one of the fastest growing in the nation, will be the next great metropolitan corridor.
The meetings I convened for Mayors between SA and Austin corridor have yielded some important conversations about transportation. In fact one concrete result has been meetings between the Austin MPO and San Antonio MPO, with a joint corridor study underway.
Let me pause for a moment to thank my council colleague Ray Lopez.
Councilman Lopez has faithfully provided solid leadership for the Alamo Area MPO for eight years, and now he is nearing the end of his terms on city council. Personally, I can say without a doubt that without his generosity and love for our city I would not be standing here today as mayor. Thank you Ray for all you have done for our city. I know we all wish you the best in your future endeavors. You are a councilman con Corazon!
I will also take a moment to thank Councilman Joe Krier for being a huge supporter of regional approaches and a welcome voice of experience – and realism-- regarding pressing transportation issues like the airport and rail linkages along the I-35 corridor.
Joe, we will miss you so much. But I know you are going to stay involved as we convene a high powered task force to help us explore options for San Antonio’s airport. Thank you!
And one more seasoned Council member will be leaving us soon – Councilman Mike Gallagher. Thank you, Mike, for your common sense approach and your dedicated service, dating back to your time as a neighborhood association president. With your continued interest in the Charter Commission I know you will remain engaged in creating positive change for our city. Here within the Bexar County area, we’ve demonstrated the heart we have by working together on tough challenges, like serving those who have never been reached by municipal services.
When we determined that it wasn’t fiscally viable for San Antonio to annex areas that needed help, I urged the city staff to get creative and start talking to the smaller cities.
Converse had already given up some of their developable land for Randolph Air Force base, hampering their city’s growth.
But we worked together to create a new annexation plan that protects the military while providing key municipal services in an area that has been left out of our overall growth and prosperity.
We could not have done it without Converse Mayor Al Suarez and Converse city council and staff. Thank you.
And thank you to the other San Antonio area mayors in attendance today. Will you stand to be recognized?
As our region grows and we work toward economic prosperity for all, there is a tough issue where we need everyone to pull together. We must come together with one voice to affirm the positive historical impact of immigrants from all over the globe to San Antonio. In particular we all know that positive trade relationships with Mexico will continue to benefit San Antonians.
My challenge to all of us is that we continue to work with our officials at the state and federal level to ensure that we don’t undo the progress and relationships created over hundreds of years, and in particular, the achievement of NAFTA. A city with heart embraces all who contribute -- and that’s who we are.
As a city with heart -- we also confront our police-community relations issues head-on.
I want to thank all of the members of the Mayor’s Council on Police Community Relations who are working so hard to come up with proactive solutions to build trust, ranging from a more transparent and timely website to expanded recruiting that hopefully will lead to more San
Antonians policing the same neighborhoods where they grew up, to increasing training for officers in dealing with our immigrant population.
And we must continue to support My Brother’s Keeper San Antonio. The vision of San Antonio as a city where everyone has an opportunity for prosperity must become a reality, regardless of your race or what neighborhood you live in. Racism and inequality are difficult topics, but with courage and caring, I know we can remain positive and focused on finding solutions.
For those same reasons I am hopeful that during the coming months we will come to a deal with the San Antonio Professional Firefighters Association. I know that their members care about this city and its safety and fiscal health as much as we all do, so there’s no reason that we can’t find common ground.
I do want to take a moment to recognize our fire department which was recently awarded a Class One Public Protection Classification which is the highest score a fire protection community can receive. Chief Hood, thank you for your leadership and thanks to all our firemen and women who serve San Antonio with heart every day.
I’d like to conclude by talking about how I recently experienced that “heart” of San Antonio up close and personal.
A couple of months ago, when tornadoes ripped through several parts of town, neighbors started helping neighbors; high school students gave up their Saturday to clean up; church members came out in droves to lend a hand, and I even met a man cutting trees and debris who said “I just saw on the news that people needed help” and then he drove from his south side home to the north side just to help someone in need.
You don’t need to look any farther than how San Antonians responded to this disaster to know that we truly are A City with Heart, una ciudad con Corazon.
I love you, San Antonio! Thank you!